Daisyworld Climate Regulation Model:

A Python simulation of the Daisyworld model inspired by Watson & Lovelock (1983), exploring how simple life forms can help regulate a planet's climate. This project demonstrates the closed-coupling between biological populations and environmental feedbacks.

Overview:

Daisyworld is a fictional world used as a toy model to illustrate how life (Biota) interacts with its environment to achieve homeostasis.

In Daisyworld there are two type of daisies; one which is dark-absorbs most solar radiation (black daisy) and another light-reflects most solar radiations (white daisy). Black daisy has lower albedo while white as higher albedo.

The sun also gradually gets brighter, reflected through increasing L, luminosity which is dimensionless. 

The model simulated the feedback loop formed between the different albedos, local temperature and the effective temperature. There are 3 simulations: 1 for just black daisies, 1 for just white daisies and last 1 for both (with 1% initial coverage for each daisies in each simulation).


Key concepts:

1) Closed-Coupling: The idea that life and its environment are interdependent; changes in one affect the other.

2) Albedo and Temperature Feedback: The planet’s overall albedo is determined by the coverage of black and white daisies. Local temperatures vary with the albedo of a patch: black daisies warm their local area, while white daisies cool theirs.

3) Differential Equations & Steady States:The system is governed by equations that balance birth (growth rate) and death rates. Steady state is achieved when the rate of daisy growth equals the rate of death.

4) Parameter q (measuring distribution of heat): Controls the distribution of heat across the planet. For q=0, there is perfect conduction (even temperature distribution). As q increases, the system approaches perfect insulation, leading to significant local temperature variations. If it exceeds a certain threshold, it equation becomes physically impossible to occur in real life.